MOUNT EVEREST
Mount Everest is Earth's highest mountain above sea level, located in the Mahalangur Himal sub-range of the Himalayas.
The China–Nepal border runs across its summit point. Its elevation (snow height) of 8,848.86 m (29,031.7 ft) was most
recently established in 2020 by the Chinese and Nepali authorities.

Mount Everest attracts many climbers, including highly experienced mountaineers. There are two main climbing routes,
one approaching the summit from the southeast in Nepal (known as the "standard route") and the other from the north in
Tibet. While not posing substantial technical climbing challenges on the standard route, Everest presents dangers such
as altitude sickness, weather, and wind, as well as hazards from avalanches and the Khumbu Icefall. As of 2019, over
300 people have died on Everest, many of whose bodies remain on the mountain.

The first recorded efforts to reach Everest's summit were made by British mountaineers. As Nepal did not allow
foreigners to enter the country at the time, the British made several attempts on the north ridge route from the
Tibetan side. After the first reconnaissance expedition by the British in 1921 reached 7,000 m (22,970 ft) on the
North Col, the 1922 expedition pushed the north ridge route up to 8,320 m (27,300 ft), marking the first time a human
had climbed above 8,000 m (26,247 ft). The 1924 expedition resulted in one of the greatest mysteries on Everest to this
day: George Mallory and Andrew Irvine made a final summit attempt on 8 June but never returned, sparking debate as to
whether they were the first to reach the top. Tenzing Norgay and Edmund Hillary made the first documented ascent of
Everest in 1953, using the southeast ridge route. Norgay had reached 8,595 m (28,199 ft) the previous year as a member
of the 1952 Swiss expedition. The Chinese mountaineering team of Wang Fuzhou, Gonpo, and Qu Yinhua made the first
reported ascent of the peak from the north ridge on 25 May 1960.

GEOLOGY
Geologists have subdivided the rocks comprising Mount Everest into three units called formations. Each formation is
separated from the other by low-angle faults, called detachments, along which they have been thrust southward over each
other. From the summit of Mount Everest to its base these rock units are the Qomolangma Formation, the North Col
Formation, and the Rongbuk Formation.

The Qomolangma Formation, also known as the Jolmo Lungama Formation, runs from the summit to the top of the Yellow Band,
about 8,600 m (28,200 ft) above sea level. It consists of greyish to dark grey or white, parallel laminated and bedded,
Ordovician limestone interlayered with subordinate beds of recrystallised dolomite with argillaceous laminae and
siltstone. Gansser first reported finding microscopic fragments of crinoids in this limestone. Later petrographic
analysis of samples of the limestone from near the summit revealed them to be composed of carbonate pellets and finely
fragmented remains of trilobites, crinoids, and ostracods. Other samples were so badly sheared and recrystallised that
their original constituents could not be determined. A thick, white-weathering thrombolite bed that is 60 m (200 ft)
thick comprises the foot of the "Third Step", and base of the summit pyramid of Everest. This bed, which crops out
starting about 70 m (230 ft) below the summit of Mount Everest, consists of sediments trapped, bound, and cemented by
the biofilms of micro-organisms, especially cyanobacteria, in shallow marine waters. The Qomolangma Formation is broken
up by several high-angle faults that terminate at the low angle normal fault, the Qomolangma Detachment. This detachment
separates it from the underlying Yellow Band. The lower five metres of the Qomolangma Formation overlying this
detachment are very highly deformed.

The bulk of Mount Everest, between 7,000 and 8,600 m (23,000 and 28,200 ft), consists of the North Col Formation, of
which the Yellow Band forms the upper part between 8,200 to 8,600 m (26,900 to 28,200 ft). The Yellow Band consists of
intercalated beds of Middle Cambrian diopside-epidote-bearing marble, which weathers a distinctive yellowish brown, and
muscovite-biotite phyllite and semischist. Petrographic analysis of marble collected from about 8,300 m (27,200 ft)
found it to consist as much as five per cent of the ghosts of recrystallised crinoid ossicles. The upper five metres of
the Yellow Band lying adjacent to the Qomolangma Detachment is badly deformed. A 5–40 cm (2.0–15.7 in) thick fault
breccia separates it from the overlying Qomolangma Formation.

The remainder of the North Col Formation, exposed between 7,000 to 8,200 m (23,000 to 26,900 ft) on Mount Everest,
consists of interlayered and deformed schist, phyllite, and minor marble. Between 7,600 and 8,200 m (24,900 and
26,900 ft), the North Col Formation consists chiefly of biotite-quartz phyllite and chlorite-biotite phyllite
intercalated with minor amounts of biotite-sericite-quartz schist. Between 7,000 and 7,600 m (23,000 and 24,900 ft), the
lower part of the North Col Formation consists of biotite-quartz schist intercalated with epidote-quartz schist,
biotite-calcite-quartz schist, and thin layers of quartzose marble. These metamorphic rocks appear to be the result of
the metamorphism of Middle to Early Cambrian deep sea flysch composed of interbedded, mudstone, shale, clayey sandstone,
calcareous sandstone, graywacke, and sandy limestone. The base of the North Col Formation is a regional low-angle normal
fault called the "Lhotse detachment".

Below 7,000 m (23,000 ft), the Rongbuk Formation underlies the North Col Formation and forms the base of Mount Everest.
It consists of sillimanite-K-feldspar grade schist and gneiss intruded by numerous sills and dikes of leucogranite
ranging in thickness from 1 cm to 1,500 m (0.4 in to 4,900 ft). These leucogranites are part of a belt of Late
Oligocene–Miocene intrusive rocks known as the Higher Himalayan leucogranite. They formed as the result of partial
melting of Paleoproterozoic to Ordovician high-grade metasedimentary rocks of the Higher Himalayan Sequence about 20 to
24 million years ago during the subduction of the Indian Plate.

Mount Everest consists of sedimentary and metamorphic rocks that have been faulted southward over continental crust
composed of Archean granulites of the Indian Plate during the Cenozoic collision of India with Asia. Current
interpretations argue that the Qomolangma and North Col formations consist of marine sediments that accumulated within
the continental shelf of the northern passive continental margin of India before it collided with Asia. The Cenozoic
collision of India with Asia subsequently deformed and metamorphosed these strata as it thrust them southward and
upward. The Rongbuk Formation consists of a sequence of high-grade metamorphic and granitic rocks that were derived from
the alteration of high-grade metasedimentary rocks. During the collision of India with Asia, these rocks were thrust
downward and to the north as they were overridden by other strata; heated, metamorphosed, and partially melted at depths
of over 15 to 20 kilometres (9.3 to 12.4 mi) below sea level; and then forced upward to surface by thrusting towards the
south between two major detachments. The Himalayas are rising by about 5 mm per year.